                        Moses

      An abridgment of the Book of Deuteronomy.
    Verse references such as ⁵·⁶ indicate the
    original source of the text, but donʼt imply
                  a full quotation.


⁵·¹Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, Hear
the statutes and ordinances that I speak today. Learn
them and observe them carefully. ²Gᴏᴅ made a cove-
nant with us. ³Gᴏᴅ did not make this covenant with
our fathers. ⁴Gᴏᴅ spoke with you on the mountain, say-
ing,

⁵·⁶I am Gᴏᴅ, who brought you out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of slavery. ⁷Donʼt have oth-
er gods before me. ⁸Donʼt make an idol for yourself
in the form of anything in the heavens or on the
earth or in the waters. ⁹Donʼt worship them or serve
them, for I am a jealous god, visiting the iniquity
of the fathers on the children to the third and
fourth generation, ¹⁰but showing love to thousands
who love me and keep my commandments.

⁵·¹¹Donʼt misuse the name of Gᴏᴅ.

⁵·¹²Observe the sabbath day by keeping it holy. ¹³La-
bor six days and do all your work, ¹⁴but the seventh
day is a sabbath to Gᴏᴅ. On it you shall not do any
work: neither you, your children, your servant, your
livestock, nor any foreigner living among you, that
they may rest as you do. ¹⁵Remember that you were
slaves in Egypt, and that Gᴏᴅ brought you out. There-
fore, Gᴏᴅ commanded you to keep the sabbath day.

⁵·¹⁶Honor your parents so that you may live long and
that it may go well with you in the land that Gᴏᴅ is
giving you.

⁵·¹⁷Donʼt murder. ¹⁸Donʼt commit adultery. ¹⁹Donʼt
steal. ²⁰Donʼt give false testimony against your
neighbor. ²¹Donʼt covet your neighborʼs wife, house,
field, servants, livestock, or anything that belongs
to your neighbor.

⁵·³²Be careful to do as Gᴏᴅ has commanded you. Donʼt
turn aside to the right or to the left. ³³Walk on the
path which Gᴏᴅ has commanded you, that you may live,
prosper, and prolong your days in the land that you
will possess.

—

⁶·⁵Love Gᴏᴅ with all your heart, soul, and strength.
⁶These words that I command you today shall be on
your heart.

⁶·¹⁰When Gᴏᴅ brings you into the land that he swore
to your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob that he
would give you — a land with large and splendid cit-
ies, ¹¹houses filled with every good thing, cisterns,
vineyards, and olive trees — when you eat and are sat-
isfied, ¹²then be careful not to forget Gᴏᴅ.

⁶·¹⁴Donʼt follow other gods, the gods of the people a-
round you, ¹⁵lest the anger of Gᴏᴅ be kindled a-
gainst you, and destroy you from the face of the
earth.

⁶·²⁰When your son asks you, “What is the meaning of
the testimonies, the statutes, and the rules that Gᴏᴅ
has commanded you?” ²¹tell him, “We were slaves to
Pharaoh in Egypt, but Gᴏᴅ brought us out of Egypt.
²³He brought us out from there in order to give us
the land that he swore to our fathers. ²⁴So Gᴏᴅ
commanded us to observe all these statutes and to
fear Gᴏᴅ for our good and our survival.”

—

⁷·¹When Gᴏᴅ brings you into the land, and clears a-
way many nations before you, ³donʼt intermarry with
them. ⁴They will turn your children away from me, to
worship other gods.

⁷·⁷Gᴏᴅ didnʼt choose you because you were more numer-
ous than other people, ⁸but because Gᴏᴅ loves you and
is keeping the oath that he swore to your fathers.

⁷·¹²If you listen to and carefully keep these
ordinances, Gᴏᴅ will keep the covenant of love with
you that he swore to your fathers. ¹³He will love
you, bless you, and multiply you. He will bless the
fruit of your womb, the crops of your land, and the
increase of your herd.

⁷·¹⁷If you say in your heart, “These nations are
greater than I. How can I dispossess them?” ¹⁸Donʼt
be afraid of them. Remember what Gᴏᴅ did to Pharaoh
and to all Egypt. ²¹Donʼt dread them, for Gᴏᴅ is a-
mong you, a great and awesome god. ²²Gᴏᴅ will clear a-
way these nations before you little by little. You
will not eliminate them all at once, lest the wild
animals become too numerous for you. ²⁵Burn the
carved images of their gods. Donʼt covet the silver
or gold that is on them, nor take it for yourself,
lest you be ensnared by it. ²⁶Donʼt bring an abomina-
tion into your house, lest you be set apart for de-
struction. Instead, utterly detest it and abhor it.

—

⁸·²Remember how Gᴏᴅ led you these forty years in the
wilderness, to humble you, and to test what was in
your heart, whether you would keep his commandments.
³He humbled you, let you go hungry, then fed you with
manna, which neither you nor your fathers had known,
to teach you that man does not live by bread alone,
but by every word that comes from the mouth of Gᴏᴅ.
⁵Know in your heart that Gᴏᴅ disciplines you just as
a man disciplines his son. ⁶Therefore keep the
commandments of Gᴏᴅ by walking in his ways and by
fearing him. ¹⁰When youʼve eaten and are satisfied,
then bless Gᴏᴅ for the good land he has given you.

⁸·¹¹Be careful not to forget Gᴏᴅ, by failing to keep
his commandments, his ordinances, and his statutes.
¹²Otherwise, once youʼve eaten and are satisfied, and
have built good houses to live in, ¹³and when your
herds multiply, and your silver and gold multiply,
and everything you have multiplies, ¹⁴then your heart
will become proud, and you will forget Gᴏᴅ, ¹⁷and you
may say in your heart, “My power and the strength of
my hand has made me this wealth.” ¹⁸But remember that
Gᴏᴅ gives you power to make wealth in order to con-
firm his covenant. ¹⁹If you forget Gᴏᴅ, follow other
gods, serve them, and worship them, I testify a-
gainst you today that you will surely perish.

—

⁹·⁴Once Gᴏᴅ has driven the people out before you,
donʼt say in your heart, “Gᴏᴅ brought me in to pos-
sess this land because of my righteousness.” In-
stead, Gᴏᴅ drives them out because of their wicked-
ness. ⁶Understand that Gᴏᴅ isnʼt giving you this good
land because of your righteousness, for you are a
stubborn people. ⁷Donʼt forget how you provoked Gᴏᴅ
in the wilderness. From the day you departed Egypt un-
til you arrived in this place, you have been rebel-
lious against Gᴏᴅ.

—

¹⁰·¹⁷Gᴏᴅ is not partial and takes no bribe. ¹⁸He
executes justice for orphans and widows, and loves
the foreigner by giving him food and clothing.
¹⁹Therefore, love the foreigner, for you were
foreigners in Egypt.

—

¹¹·²Remember that your children didnʼt experience the
discipline of Gᴏᴅ; his works which he did in Egypt;
⁴what he did to the army of Egypt; how he made the wa-
ter of the Red sea engulf them as they pursued you;
⁵and what he did to you in the wilderness, until you
reached this place; ⁷but your eyes have seen every
great work Gᴏᴅ has done.

¹¹·¹⁶Be careful not to be enticed to turn aside and
serve other gods and worship them. ¹⁸Therefore im-
print my words on your heart and on your soul, bind
them as a sign on your hand, and wear them on your
foreheads. ¹⁹Teach them to your children, speak of
them when you sit in your house, when you walk along
the road, when you lie down, and when you get up.
²⁰Write them on the doorposts of your house and on
your gates, ²¹that your days, and the days of your
children, may be multiplied as long as the heavens
are above the earth.

—

¹²·⁴Donʼt worship Gᴏᴅ in the same way as the nations
you dispossess. ⁵Instead, seek the place where Gᴏᴅ
chooses to establish his name. Go there ⁶and bring
your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes,
your contributions, your vow offerings, your free-
will offerings, and the firstborn of your livestock.
⁷There, in the presence of Gᴏᴅ, you and your families
will eat and rejoice in everything you undertake, be-
cause Gᴏᴅ has blessed you.

¹²·²⁰When Gᴏᴅ enlarges your territory as he has prom-
ised you, and you say, “I want to eat meat,” you may
eat meat whenever you want.

¹²·²⁹When Gᴏᴅ cuts off the nations before you, and
you live in their land, ³⁰be careful not to be en-
snared by their ways, ³¹for they have done every de-
testable act for their gods; even burning their chil-
dren as sacrifices.

—

¹³·¹If a prophet arises among you, and gives you a
sign or a wonder, ²and it comes true, but he says,
“Let us follow other gods and worship them,” ³donʼt
listen to that prophet. For Gᴏᴅ is testing you to
find out whether you love Gᴏᴅ with all your heart and
with all your soul.

¹³·⁶If your brother, child, wife, or friend secretly
entices you, saying, “Let us worship other gods,”
⁸donʼt yield to him and donʼt listen to him.

—

¹⁴·²²Set aside a tenth of the produce that is
harvested from your fields each year. ²³Eat the tithe
of your grain, of your wine, and of your oil, and the
firstborn of your livestock before Gᴏᴅ, in the place
where he chooses to establish his name, so that you
may learn to fear Gᴏᴅ always.

¹⁴·²⁴If the distance is so great that you canʼt car-
ry it, ²⁵then turn it into money and take the money
to the place where Gᴏᴅ chooses to establish his name.
²⁶Spend the money for whatever you want, for oxen, or
sheep, or wine, or strong drink. Eat it before Gᴏᴅ
and rejoice, you and your household. ²⁷Donʼt neglect
the Levite who is in your town, for he has no por-
tion or inheritance with you.

¹⁴·²⁸At the end of every third year, bring all the
tithe of that yearʼs produce and store it in your
town. ²⁹The Levite, the foreigner, the fatherless,
and the widow in your town shall come and eat and be
satisfied, so that Gᴏᴅ may bless you in all your
work.

—

¹⁵·¹At the end of every seventh year, cancel debts.
²Every creditor must cancel the loans he made to his
neighbor. He must not demand payment from his neigh-
bor. ³You may require payment from a foreigner, but
you must forgive whatever your brother owes you. ⁶For
Gᴏᴅ will bless you, as he has promised. You will lend
to many nations, but you will not borrow. You will
rule many nations, but none will rule you.

¹⁵·⁷If there is a poor man among you, in any of your
towns, donʼt harden your heart or shut your hand to-
wards him. ⁸Instead, open your hand to him and lend
him sufficient for his need, whatever it may be.

¹⁵·⁹Be careful not to have this wicked thought: “The
seventh year, the year of release, is near,” and you
look grudgingly on your poor brother and give him
nothing. He will cry to Gᴏᴅ against you, and you will
be guilty. ¹⁰Give generously to him without a grudg-
ing heart. Because of this Gᴏᴅ will bless you in eve-
rything you do. ¹¹There will always be poor people in
the land. Therefore freely open your hand to your
brother, to the poor, and to the needy.

¹⁵·¹²If a fellow Hebrew is sold to you, and serves
you for six years, free him in the seventh year.
¹³When you free him, donʼt send him away empty-
handed. ¹⁴Furnish him liberally from your flock, from
your threshing floor, and from your winepress. Give
to him as Gᴏᴅ has blessed you. ¹⁵Remember that you
were a slave in Egypt, and Gᴏᴅ redeemed you. That is
why I am giving you this command. ¹⁸Donʼt consider it
a hardship when you set him free, for he served you
six years at half the cost of a hired servant. Gᴏᴅ
will bless you in all you do.

¹⁵·¹⁹Dedicate to Gᴏᴅ every firstborn male of your
livestock. Do no work with the firstborn of your
herd, nor shear the firstborn of your flock. ²⁰Each
year you and your family are to eat it before Gᴏᴅ in
the place Gᴏᴅ chooses. ²¹If it has any defect, is
lame or blind, donʼt sacrifice it to Gᴏᴅ.

—

¹⁶·¹Observe the month of Aviv and celebrate the
Passover to Gᴏᴅ, for in the month of Aviv Gᴏᴅ brought
you out of Egypt by night. ³For seven days you are to
eat unleavened bread—because you left Egypt in
haste—so that you may remember the day you left Egypt
for the rest of your life. ⁴Let no yeast be found in
your territory for seven days. ⁶Sacrifice the
Passover at sunset, at the time you came out of
Egypt. ⁸On the seventh day hold a solemn assembly to
Gᴏᴅ, and do no work.

¹⁶·⁹Seven weeks after you start the grain harvest,
¹⁰celebrate the Feast of Weeks to Gᴏᴅ by giving a
freewill offering in proportion to how Gᴏᴅ has bless-
ed you. ¹¹Rejoice before Gᴏᴅ; you, your children,
your servants, and the Levites in your town; the for-
eigner, the orphan, and the widow, who are among you.

¹⁶·¹³Celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles for seven
days after gathering the produce from your threshing
floor and winepress. ¹⁴Rejoice during your feast;
you, your children, your servants, and the Levites;
the stranger, the orphan, and the widow who are a-
mong you. ¹⁵Celebrate the feast to Gᴏᴅ for seven
days, because Gᴏᴅ will bless you in all your produce
and in all the work of your hands, so that you will
be altogether joyful.

¹⁶·¹⁶All males must appear three times a year before
Gᴏᴅ where he chooses: at the Feast of Unleavened
Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. None shall appear before Gᴏᴅ empty-
handed. ¹⁷Each of you must bring a gift in propor-
tion to how Gᴏᴅ has blessed you.

¹⁶·¹⁸Appoint judges and officers for your tribes in
all your towns. They shall judge the people right-
eously. ¹⁹Donʼt pervert justice or be partial. Donʼt
take a bribe, for it blinds the wise and twists the
words of the righteous. ²⁰Pursue justice, and only
justice.

—

¹⁷·¹Donʼt sacrifice to Gᴏᴅ an ox or a sheep with any
blemish or defect, for that is detestable to Gᴏᴅ.

¹⁷·²If anyone in any of your towns ³has worshiped oth-
er gods, ⁴and if you hear about it, then investigate
diligently. If it is true and certain, ⁵bring him to
your city gates and stone him to death. ⁶He shall be
put to death on the testimony of two or three
witnesses, but not on the testimony of one witness.
⁷The hands of the witnesses shall be first against
him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of
all the people.

¹⁷·⁸If a case is too difficult for you to judge,
whether homicide, lawsuit, or assault, then go to the
place Gᴏᴅ chooses, ⁹and ask the priests or the judge
who is in office, and they will give you the ver-
dict. ¹⁰You must abide by the verdict they give you.
Be careful to do everything they tell you.

¹⁷·¹⁴When you enter the land Gᴏᴅ is giving you, and
you possess it, and live in it, and say, “I will set
a king over me like all the nations around me,” ¹⁵ap-
point a king whom Gᴏᴅ chooses, one from among your
brothers. Donʼt appoint a foreigner who is not your
brother. ¹⁶He must not acquire many horses for him-
self or send the people to Egypt to acquire many hors-
es. For Gᴏᴅ has told you, “Never return that way a-
gain.” ¹⁷He must not acquire many wives for himself,
lest his heart go astray. He must not acquire exces-
sive silver and gold for himself.

¹⁷·¹⁸When he sits on the throne, he must write for
himself a copy of this law, in the presence of the
Levites. ¹⁹He must read from it all the days of his
life, so he may learn to fear Gᴏᴅ by observing this
law and these statutes, ²⁰lest his heart be lifted up
above his countrymen or he turn aside from the com-
mandment.

—

¹⁸·⁹When you enter the land which Gᴏᴅ is giving you,
donʼt imitate the detestable practices of those
nations. ¹⁰No one among you is to sacrifice his child
in the fire, practice divination, tell fortunes, prac-
tice sorcery, ¹¹cast spells, consult a medium or spir-
itist, or inquire of the dead.

¹⁸·¹⁵Gᴏᴅ will raise up for you a prophet like me from
among your countrymen. Listen to him. ¹⁸I will put my
words in his mouth, and he will tell them everything
I command him. ¹⁹I will hold accountable those who do
not listen to my words that he speaks in my name.

¹⁸·²¹You may ask yourself, “How can we know when a
message is not from Gᴏᴅ?” ²²When a prophet speaks in
Gᴏᴅʼs name and it does not come true, then Gᴏᴅ has
not spoken that message. The prophet spoke presumptu-
ously. Donʼt be afraid of him.

—

¹⁹·²Set apart three cities for yourselves in the mid-
dle of the land that Gᴏᴅ is giving you. ³Divide the
land into three parts, so that any manslayer can flee
to these cities. ⁴A manslayer is one who kills his
neighbor accidentally without previous hostility. ⁵He
may flee to one of these cities and live, ⁶lest the a-
venger of blood pursue the manslayer in anger, and
kill him, though he did not deserve death.

¹⁹·¹⁴Donʼt move your neighborʼs boundary mark,
established by your predecessors.

¹⁹·¹⁵One witness is insufficient to establish wrong-
doing by any man. A charge must be established on the
evidence of two or three witnesses. ¹⁶If a malicious
witness accuses someone of wrongdoing, ¹⁷then both
people in the dispute must appear before Gᴏᴅ, before
the priests and the judges. ¹⁸The judges must inves-
tigate thoroughly, and if the witness has accused his
brother falsely, ¹⁹then you must do to him as he in-
tended to do to his brother.

—

²⁰·¹When you go to war against your enemies and see
horses, chariots, and an army larger than yours,
donʼt be afraid of them, for Gᴏᴅ, who brought you out
of Egypt, is with you. ²When you approach the bat-
tle, the priest shall come forward and speak to the
army, ³saying, “Hear, O Israel, today you approach
battle against your enemies. Donʼt be fainthearted.
Donʼt fear or panic or be terrified of them, ⁴for Gᴏᴅ
goes with you to fight against your enemies, to give
you victory.” ⁵The officers shall speak to the army,
saying, “Has any man built a new house and not dedi-
cated it? ⁶Has any man planted a vineyard and not yet
enjoyed its fruit? ⁷Has any man become engaged to a
woman and not yet married her? ⁸Is any man afraid or
fainthearted? Let them return home.”

²⁰·¹⁹When you besiege a city for a long time, donʼt
destroy its trees. Are the trees human that you
should besiege them? ²⁰You may only cut down trees
that you know to produce no food. Use them to con-
struct siegeworks against the city until it falls.

—

²¹·¹⁵If a man has two wives, one loved and the other
unloved, and both bear him sons, and the firstborn
belongs to the unloved, ¹⁶then, when his sons inher-
it what he has, he may not favor the son of the loved
wife over the son of the unloved wife. ¹⁷He must ac-
knowledge the firstborn, the son of the unloved wife,
by giving him a double portion of all he has. The
right of the firstborn is his.

—

²²·¹If you see your brotherʼs animal straying, donʼt
ignore it. Bring it back to him. ²If he lives far a-
way or you donʼt know who he is, bring it home and
care for it until your brother looks for it, then re-
turn it to him. ³Do the same with anything else that
your brother loses and you find. Donʼt ignore it.
⁴Donʼt ignore your brotherʼs donkey or ox when it
collapses on the road. Help him lift it up again.

²²·⁵A woman shall not wear menʼs clothes, neither
shall a man wear womenʼs clothes, for Gᴏᴅ detests
those who do it.

²²·⁶If you come across a birdʼs nest with chicks or
eggs, and the mother is sitting on them, donʼt take
the mother with the young. ⁷You may take the young
but let the mother go so that you may prosper and
have a long life.

²²·⁸When you build a new house, construct a railing a-
round your roof, lest you bring bloodguilt on your
house if anyone falls from it.

—

²³·⁹When you are encamped against your enemies, ¹²des-
ignate a place outside the camp where you can go to
relieve yourself. ¹³Keep a digging tool in your e-
quipment so that when you relieve yourself you can
dig a hole and cover your excrement. ¹⁴For Gᴏᴅ walks
through your camp to protect you and to defeat your
enemies. Your camp must be holy lest he see some-
thing indecent among you and turn away from you.

²³·¹⁵Donʼt return a slave to his master after he has
escaped to you. ¹⁶Let him live among you wherever he
chooses. Donʼt mistreat him.

²³·¹⁷No man or woman of Israel shall be a shrine pros-
titute. ¹⁸Donʼt bring the earnings of a prostitute,
female or male, into the house of Gᴏᴅ to pay any vow,
because both are detestable to Gᴏᴅ.

²³·¹⁹Donʼt charge your brother interest. ²⁰You may
charge interest to a foreigner, but not to your broth-
er, so that Gᴏᴅ may bless you in everything you un-
dertake.

²³·²¹When you make a vow to Gᴏᴅ, donʼt delay fulfil-
ling it, for Gᴏᴅ will surely require it of you, and
you will be guilty of sin. ²²But itʼs not a sin to re-
frain from making a vow. ²³Be careful to do what you
say, because you made your promise freely to Gᴏᴅ with
your own mouth.

²³·²⁴If you enter your neighborʼs vineyard, you may
eat your fill of grapes, but donʼt put any in your
basket. ²⁵If you enter your neighborʼs standing
grain, you may pluck grain with your hand, but donʼt
harvest it with a sickle.

—

²⁴·¹If a man marries a woman, but she displeases him
because he finds some indecency in her, then let him
write her a divorce certificate, and send her out of
his house. ²When she leaves his house, she may marry
another man.

²⁴·⁵When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go to
war or be liable for any public duty for one year. He
is free to stay home, so that he can bring joy to his
new wife.

²⁴·⁶Donʼt take a mill or an upper millstone in
pledge, for that would be taking a life in pledge.

²⁴·¹⁰If you lend anything to your neighbor, donʼt en-
ter his house to collect his pledge. ¹¹Remain out-
side and let your neighbor bring the pledge out to
you. ¹²If the man is poor, donʼt keep his pledge o-
vernight. ¹³Return it to him when the sun sets, so
that he may sleep in his cloak and bless you.

²⁴·¹⁴Donʼt oppress a hired worker who is poor and
needy, whether he is a brother or a foreigner living
in your land. ¹⁵Give him his wages each day before
the sun sets, for he is poor and depends on them;
lest he cry to Gᴏᴅ against you, and you become guilt-
y of sin.

²⁴·¹⁶Fathers shall not be put to death for their chil-
dren, nor children put to death for their fathers.
Each one shall be put to death for his own sin.

²⁴·¹⁷Donʼt deny justice to a foreigner or an orphan,
and donʼt take a widowʼs cloak as a pledge. ¹⁸Remem-
ber that you were a slave in Egypt, and that Gᴏᴅ
redeemed you from there.

²⁴·¹⁹When you reap your harvest and forget a sheaf in
the field, donʼt go back to get it. Leave it for the
foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, so that Gᴏᴅ may
bless you in all the work of your hands. ²⁰When you
beat the olives from your trees, donʼt go over the
branches again. ²¹When you gather the grapes from
your vineyard, donʼt go over the vines again. What re-
mains is for the foreigner, the orphan, and the wid-
ow. ²²Remember that you were a slave in Egypt.

—

²⁵·⁴Donʼt muzzle the ox while it treads out the
grain.

²⁵·¹³Donʼt carry differing weights in your bag, one
heavy and one light. ¹⁴Donʼt have differing measures
in your house, one large and one small. ¹⁵Use accu-
rate and honest weights and measures. ¹⁶For Gᴏᴅ
detests those who are dishonest in such things.

—

²⁶·²Put into a basket some of the first fruit of the
harvest. ³Go to the priest. ⁴The priest shall take
the basket from your hand and set it down before the
altar of Gᴏᴅ. ⁵Say before Gᴏᴅ, “My father was a wan-
dering Aramean. He went down to Egypt with a few peo-
ple, sojourned there, and became a great, mighty, and
populous nation. ⁶The Egyptians mistreated us, humil-
iated us, and imposed hard labor on us. ⁷Then we
cried to Gᴏᴅ, the god of our fathers, and Gᴏᴅ heard
our voice and saw our affliction, our toil, and our
oppression, ⁸Gᴏᴅ brought us out of Egypt with a might-
y hand, an outstretched arm, great deeds of terror,
signs, and wonders. ⁹He brought us to this place and
gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and hon-
ey. ¹⁰I bring the first fruit of the ground, which
you, O Gᴏᴅ, have given me.” Set it before Gᴏᴅ and wor-
ship before Gᴏᴅ. ¹¹You, the Levite, and the foreign-
er shall rejoice in all the good things which Gᴏᴅ has
given to you and your household.

²⁶·¹²When you have finished paying all the tithes of
your produce in the third year, give it to the
Levite, the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, so
that they may eat in your towns and be satisfied.
¹³Say before Gᴏᴅ, “I have taken the sacred portion
out of my house. I have given it to the Levite, the
foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, according to
all the commandments you gave me. I have not
transgressed or forgotten your commandments. ¹⁴I have
not eaten any of the tithe while in mourning, or re-
moved any of it while unclean, or offered any of it
to the dead. I have obeyed Gᴏᴅ. I have done all you
commanded me. ¹⁵Look down from heaven, your holy hab-
itation, and bless your people Israel and the land
you have given us, as you swore to our fathers, a
land flowing with milk and honey.”

