                        Moses

      An abridgment of the Book of Deuteronomy.
    Verse references such as ⁵·⁶ indicate the
     original source of the text, but don't imply
                  a full quotation.


⁵·¹Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, Hear
the statutes and ordinances that I speak today. Learn
them and observe them carefully. ²GOD made a cove-
nant with us. ³GOD did not make this covenant with
our fathers. ⁴GOD spoke with you on the mountain, say-
ing,

⁵·⁶I am GOD, who brought you out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of slavery. ⁷Don't have oth-
er gods before me. ⁸Don't make an idol for yourself
in the form of anything in the heavens or on the
earth or in the waters. ⁹Don't worship them or serve
them, for I am a jealous god, visiting the iniquity
of the fathers on the children to the third and
fourth generation, ¹⁰but showing love to thousands
who love me and keep my commandments.

⁵·¹¹Don't misuse the name of GOD.

⁵·¹²Observe the sabbath day by keeping it holy. ¹³La-
bor six days and do all your work, ¹⁴but the seventh
day is a sabbath to GOD. On it you shall not do any
work: neither you, your children, your servant, your
livestock, nor any foreigner living among you, that
they may rest as you do. ¹⁵Remember that you were
slaves in Egypt, and that GOD brought you out. There-
fore, GOD commanded you to keep the sabbath day.

⁵·¹⁶Honor your parents so that you may live long and
that it may go well with you in the land that GOD is
giving you.

⁵·¹⁷Don't murder. ¹⁸Don't commit adultery. ¹⁹Don't
steal. ²⁰Don't give false testimony against your
neighbor. ²¹Don't covet your neighbor's wife, house,
field, servants, livestock, or anything that belongs
to your neighbor.

⁵·³²Be careful to do as GOD has commanded you. Don't
turn aside to the right or to the left. ³³Walk on the
path which GOD has commanded you, that you may live,
prosper, and prolong your days in the land that you
will possess.

—

⁶·⁵Love GOD with all your heart, soul, and stren+gth.
⁶These words that I command you today shall be on
your heart.

⁶·¹⁰When GOD brings you into the land that he swore
to your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob that he
would give you --- a land with large and splendid cit-
ies, ¹¹houses filled with every good thing, cisterns,
vineyards, and olive trees --- when you eat and are
satisfied, ¹²then be careful not to forget GOD.

⁶·¹⁴Don't follow other gods, the gods of the people a-
round you, ¹⁵lest the anger of GOD be kindled a-
gainst you, and destroy you from the face of the
earth.

⁶·²⁰When your son asks you, “What is the meaning of
the testimonies, the statutes, and the rules that GOD
has commanded you?” ²¹tell him, “We were slaves to
Pharaoh in Egypt, but GOD brought us out of Egypt.
²³He brought us out from there in order to give us
the land that he swore to our fathers. ²⁴So GOD
commanded us to observe all these statutes and to
fear GOD for our good and our survival.)

—

⁷·¹When GOD brings you into the land, and clears a-
way many nations before you, ³don't intermarry with
them. ⁴They will turn your children away from me, to
worship other gods.

⁷·⁷GOD didn't choose you because you were more numer-
ous than other people, ⁸but because GOD loves you and
is keeping the oath that he swore to your fathers.

⁷·¹²If you listen to and carefully keep these
ordinances, GOD will keep the covenant of love with
you that he swore to your fathers. ¹³He will love
you, bless you, and multiply you. He will bless the
fruit of your womb, the crops of your land, and the
increase of your herd.

⁷·¹⁷If you say in your heart, “These nations are
greater than I. How can I dispossess them?” ¹⁸Don't
be afraid of them. Remember what GOD did to Pharaoh
and to all Egypt. ²¹Don't dread them, for GOD is a-
mong you, a great and awesome god. ²²GOD will clear a-
way these nations before you little by little. You
will not eliminate them all at once, lest the wild
animals become too numerous for you. ²⁵Burn the
carved images of their gods. Don't covet the silver
or gold that is on them, nor take it for yourself,
lest you be ensnared by it. ²⁶Don't bring an abomina-
tion into your house, lest you be set apart for de-
struction. Instead, utterly detest it and abhor it.

—

⁸·²Remember how GOD led you these forty years in the
wilderness, to humble you, and to test what was in
your heart, whether you would keep his commandments.
³He humbled you, let you go hungry, then fed you with
manna, which neither you nor your fathers had known,
to teach you that man does not live by bread alone,
but by every word that comes from the mouth of GOD.
⁵Know in your heart that GOD disciplines you just as
a man disciplines his son. ⁶Therefore keep the
commandments of GOD by walking in his ways and by
fearing him. ¹⁰When you've eaten and are satisfied,
then bless GOD for the good land he has given you.

⁸·¹¹Be careful not to forget GOD, by failing to keep
his commandments, his ordinances, and his statutes.
¹²Otherwise, once you've eaten and are satisfied, and
have built good houses to live in, ¹³and when your
herds multiply, and your silver and gold multiply,
and everything you have multiplies, ¹⁴then your heart
will become proud, and you will forget GOD, ¹⁷and you
may say in your heart, “My power and the strength of
my hand has made me this wealth.” ¹⁸But remember that
GOD gives you power to make wealth in order to con-
firm his covenant. ¹⁹If you forget GOD, follow other
gods, serve them, and worship them, I testify a-
gainst you today that you will surely perish.

—

⁹·⁴Once GOD has driven the people out before you,
don't say in your heart, “GOD brought me in to pos-
sess this land because of my righteousness.” In-
stead, GOD drives them out because of their wicked-
ness. ⁶Understand that GOD isn't giving you this good
land because of your righteousness, for you are a
stubborn people. ⁷Don't forget how you provoked GOD
in the wilderness. From the day you departed Egypt un-
til you arrived in this place, you have been rebel-
lious against GOD.

—

¹⁰·¹⁷GOD is not partial and takes no bribe. ¹⁸He
executes justice for orphans and widows, and loves
the foreigner by giving him food and clothing.
¹⁹Therefore, love the foreigner, for you were
foreigners in Egypt.

—

¹¹·²Remember that your children didn't experience the
discipline of GOD; his works which he did in Egypt;
⁴what he did to the army of Egypt; how he made the wa-
ter of the Red sea engulf them as they pursued you;
⁵and what he did to you in the wilderness, until you
reached this place; ⁷but your eyes have seen every
great work GOD has done.

¹¹·¹⁶Be careful not to be enticed to turn aside and
serve other gods and worship them. ¹⁸Therefore im-
print my words on your heart and on your soul, bind
them as a sign on your hand, and wear them on your
foreheads. ¹⁹Teach them to your children, speak of
them when you sit in your house, when you walk along
the road, when you lie down, and when you get up.
²⁰Write them on the doorposts of your house and on
your gates, ²¹that your days, and the days of your
children, may be multiplied as long as the heavens
are above the earth.

—

¹²·⁴Don't worship GOD in the same way as the nations
you dispossess. ⁵Instead, seek the place where GOD
chooses to establish his name. Go there ⁶and bring
your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes,
your contributions, your vow offerings, your free-
will offerings, and the firstborn of your livestock.
⁷There, in the presence of GOD, you and your families
will eat and rejoice in everything you undertake, be-
cause GOD has blessed you.

¹²·²⁰When GOD enlarges your territory as he has prom-
ised you, and you say, “I want to eat meat,” you may
eat meat whenever you want.

¹²·²⁹When GOD cuts off the nations before you, and
you live in their land, ³⁰be careful not to be en-
snared by their ways, ³¹for they have done every de-
testable act for their gods; even burning their chil-
dren as sacrifices.

—

¹³·¹If a prophet arises among you, and gives you a
sign or a wonder, ²and it comes true, but he says,
“Let us follow other gods and worship them,” ³don't
listen to that prophet. For GOD is testing you to
find out whether you love GOD with all your heart and
with all your soul.

¹³·⁶If your brother, child, wife, or friend secretly
entices you, saying, “Let us worship other gods,”
⁸don't yield to him and don't listen to him.

—

¹⁴·²²Set aside a tenth of the produce that is
harvested from your fields each year. ²³Eat the tithe
of your grain, of your wine, and of your oil, and the
firstborn of your livestock before GOD, in the place
where he chooses to establish his name, so that you
may learn to fear GOD always.

¹⁴·²⁴If the distance is so great that you can't car-
ry it, ²⁵then turn it into money and take the money
to the place where GOD chooses to establish his name.
²⁶Spend the money for whatever you want, for oxen, or
sheep, or wine, or strong drink. Eat it before GOD
and rejoice, you and your household. ²⁷Don't neglect
the Levite who is in your town, for he has no por-
tion or inheritance with you.

¹⁴·²⁸At the end of every third year, bring all the
tithe of that year's produce and store it in your
town. ²⁹The Levite, the foreigner, the fatherless,
and the widow in your town shall come and eat and be
satisfied, so that GOD may bless you in all your
work.

—

¹⁵·¹At the end of every seventh year, cancel debts.
²Every creditor must cancel the loans he made to his
neighbor. He must not demand payment from his neigh-
bor. ³You may require payment from a foreigner, but
you must forgive whatever your brother owes you. ⁶For
GOD will bless you, as he has promised. You will lend
to many nations, but you will not borrow. You will
rule many nations, but none will rule you.

¹⁵·⁷If there is a poor man among you, in any of your
towns, don't harden your heart or shut your hand to-
wards him. ⁸Instead, open your hand to him and lend
him sufficient for his need, whatever it may be.

¹⁵·⁹Be careful not to have this wicked thought: “The
seventh year, the year of release, is near,” and you
look grudgingly on your poor brother and give him
nothing. He will cry to GOD against you, and you will
be guilty. ¹⁰Give generously to him without a grudg-
ing heart. Because of this GOD will bless you in eve-
rything you do. ¹¹There will always be poor people in
the land. Therefore freely open your hand to your
brother, to the poor, and to the needy.

¹⁵·¹²If a fellow Hebrew is sold to you, and serves
you for six years, free him in the seventh year.
¹³When you free him, don't send him away empty-
handed. ¹⁴Furnish him liberally from your flock, from
your threshing floor, and from your winepress. Give
to him as GOD has blessed you. ¹⁵Remember that you
were a slave in Egypt, and GOD redeemed you. That is
why I am giving you this command. ¹⁸Don't consider it
a hardship when you set him free, for he served you
six years at half the cost of a hired servant. GOD
will bless you in all you do.

¹⁵·¹⁹Dedicate to GOD every firstborn male of your
livestock. Do no work with the firstborn of your
herd, nor shear the firstborn of your flock. ²⁰Each
year you and your family are to eat it before GOD in
the place GOD chooses. ²¹If it has any defect, is
lame or blind, don't sacrifice it to GOD.

—

¹⁶·¹Observe the month of Aviv and celebrate the
Passover to GOD, for in the month of Aviv GOD brought
you out of Egypt by night. ³For seven days you are to
eat unleavened bread---because you left Egypt in
haste---so that you may remember the day you left
Egypt for the rest of your life. ⁴Let no yeast be
found in your territory for seven days. ⁶Sacrifice
the Passover at sunset, at the time you came out of
Egypt. ⁸On the seventh day hold a solemn assembly to
GOD, and do no work.

¹⁶·⁹Seven weeks after you start the grain harvest,
¹⁰celebrate the Feast of Weeks to GOD by giving a
freewill offering in proportion to how GOD has bless-
ed you. ¹¹Rejoice before GOD; you, your children,
your servants, and the Levites in your town; the for-
eigner, the orphan, and the widow, who are among you.

¹⁶·¹³Celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles for seven
days after gathering the produce from your threshing
floor and winepress. ¹⁴Rejoice during your feast;
you, your children, your servants, and the Levites;
the stranger, the orphan, and the widow who are a-
mong you. ¹⁵Celebrate the feast to GOD for seven
days, because GOD will bless you in all your produce
and in all the work of your hands, so that you will
be altogether joyful.

¹⁶·¹⁶All males must appear three times a year before
GOD where he chooses: at the Feast of Unleavened
Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. None shall appear before GOD empty-
handed. ¹⁷Each of you must bring a gift in propor-
tion to how GOD has blessed you.

¹⁶·¹⁸Appoint judges and officers for your tribes in
all your towns. They shall judge the people right-
eously. ¹⁹Don't pervert justice or be partial. Don't
take a bribe, for it blinds the wise and twists the
words of the righteous. ²⁰Pursue justice, and only
justice.

—

¹⁷·¹Don't sacrifice to GOD an ox or a sheep with any
blemish or defect, for that is detestable to GOD.

¹⁷·²If anyone in any of your towns ³has worshiped oth-
er gods, ⁴and if you hear about it, then investigate
diligently. If it is true and certain, ⁵bring him to
your city gates and stone him to death. ⁶He shall be
put to death on the testimony of two or three
witnesses, but not on the testimony of one witness.
⁷The hands of the witnesses shall be first against
him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of
all the people.

¹⁷·⁸If a case is too difficult for you to judge,
whether homicide, lawsuit, or assault, then go to the
place GOD chooses, ⁹and ask the priests or the judge
who is in office, and they will give you the ver-
dict. ¹⁰You must abide by the verdict they give you.
Be careful to do everything they tell you.

¹⁷·¹⁴When you enter the land GOD is giving you, and
you possess it, and live in it, and say, “I will set
a king over me like all the nations around me,” ¹⁵ap-
point a king whom GOD chooses, one from among your
brothers. Don't appoint a foreigner who is not your
brother. ¹⁶He must not acquire many horses for him-
self or send the people to Egypt to acquire many hors-
es. For GOD has told you, “Never return that way a-
gain.” ¹⁷He must not acquire many wives for himself,
lest his heart go astray. He must not acquire exces-
sive silver and gold for himself.

¹⁷·¹⁸When he sits on the throne, he must write for
himself a copy of this law, in the presence of the
Levites. ¹⁹He must read from it all the days of his
life, so he may learn to fear GOD by observing this
law and these statutes, ²⁰lest his heart be lifted up
above his countrymen or he turn aside from the com-
mandment.

—

¹⁸·⁹When you enter the land which GOD is giving you,
don't imitate the detestable practices of those
nations. ¹⁰No one among you is to sacrifice his child
in the fire, practice divination, tell fortunes, prac-
tice sorcery, ¹¹cast spells, consult a medium or spir-
itist, or inquire of the dead.

¹⁸·¹⁵GOD will raise up for you a prophet like me from
among your countrymen. Listen to him. ¹⁸I will put my
words in his mouth, and he will tell them everything
I command him. ¹⁹I will hold accountable those who do
not listen to my words that he speaks in my name.

¹⁸·²¹You may ask yourself, “How can we know when a
message is not from GOD?” ²²When a prophet speaks in
GOD's name and it does not come true, then GOD has
not spoken that message. The prophet spoke presumptu-
ously. Don't be afraid of him.

—

¹⁹·²Set apart three cities for yourselves in the mid-
dle of the land that GOD is giving you. ³Divide the
land into three parts, so that any manslayer can flee
to these cities. ⁴A manslayer is one who kills his
neighbor accidentally without previous hostility. ⁵He
may flee to one of these cities and live, ⁶lest the a-
venger of blood pursue the manslayer in anger, and
kill him, though he did not deserve death.

¹⁹·¹⁴Don't move your neighbor's boundary mark,
established by your predecessors.

¹⁹·¹⁵One witness is insufficient to establish wrong-
doing by any man. A charge must be established on the
evidence of two or three witnesses. ¹⁶If a malicious
witness accuses someone of wrongdoing, ¹⁷then both
people in the dispute must appear before GOD, before
the priests and the judges. ¹⁸The judges must inves-
tigate thoroughly, and if the witness has accused his
brother falsely, ¹⁹then you must do to him as he in-
tended to do to his brother.

—

²⁰·¹When you go to war against your enemies and see
horses, chariots, and an army larger than yours,
don't be afraid of them, for GOD, who brought you out
of Egypt, is with you. ²When you approach the bat-
tle, the priest shall come forward and speak to the
army, ³saying, “Hear, O Israel, today you approach
battle against your enemies. Don't be fainthearted.
Don't fear or panic or be terrified of them, ⁴for GOD
goes with you to fight against your enemies, to give
you victory.) ⁵The officers shall speak to the army,
saying, “Has any man built a new house and not dedi-
cated it? ⁶Has any man planted a vineyard and not yet
enjoyed its fruit? ⁷Has any man become engaged to a
woman and not yet married her? ⁸Is any man afraid or
fainthearted? Let them return home.)

²⁰·¹⁹When you besiege a city for a long time, don't
destroy its trees. Are the trees human that you
should besiege them? ²⁰You may only cut down trees
that you know to produce no food. Use them to con-
struct siegeworks against the city until it falls.

—

²¹·¹⁵If a man has two wives, one loved and the other
unloved, and both bear him sons, and the firstborn
belongs to the unloved, ¹⁶then, when his sons inher-
it what he has, he may not favor the son of the loved
wife over the son of the unloved wife. ¹⁷He must ac-
knowledge the firstborn, the son of the unloved wife,
by giving him a double portion of all he has. The
right of the firstborn is his.

—

²²·¹If you see your brother's animal straying, don't
ignore it. Bring it back to him. ²If he lives far a-
way or you don't know who he is, bring it home and
care for it until your brother looks for it, then re-
turn it to him. ³Do the same with anything else that
your brother loses and you find. Don't ignore it.
⁴Don't ignore your brother's donkey or ox when it
collapses on the road. Help him lift it up again.

²²·⁵A woman shall not wear men's clothes, neither
shall a man wear women's clothes, for GOD detests
those who do it.

²²·⁶If you come across a bird's nest with chicks or
eggs, and the mother is sitting on them, don't take
the mother with the young. ⁷You may take the young
but let the mother go so that you may prosper and
have a long life.

²²·⁸When you build a new house, construct a railing a-
round your roof, lest you bring bloodguilt on your
house if anyone falls from it.

—

²³·⁹When you are encamped against your enemies, ¹²des-
ignate a place outside the camp where you can go to
relieve yourself. ¹³Keep a digging tool in your e-
quipment so that when you relieve yourself you can
dig a hole and cover your excrement. ¹⁴For GOD walks
through your camp to protect you and to defeat your
enemies. Your camp must be holy lest he see some-
thing indecent among you and turn away from you.

²³·¹⁵Don't return a slave to his master after he has
escaped to you. ¹⁶Let him live among you wherever he
chooses. Don't mistreat him.

²³·¹⁷No man or woman of Israel shall be a shrine pros-
titute. ¹⁸Don't bring the earnings of a prostitute,
female or male, into the house of GOD to pay any vow,
because both are detestable to GOD.

²³·¹⁹Don't charge your brother interest. ²⁰You may
charge interest to a foreigner, but not to your broth-
er, so that GOD may bless you in everything you un-
dertake.

²³·²¹When you make a vow to GOD, don't delay fulfil-
ling it, for GOD will surely require it of you, and
you will be guilty of sin. ²²But it's not a sin to re-
frain from making a vow. ²³Be careful to do what you
say, because you made your promise freely to GOD with
your own mouth.

²³·²⁴If you enter your neighbor's vineyard, you may
eat your fill of grapes, but don't put any in your
basket. ²⁵If you enter your neighbor's standing
grain, you may pluck grain with your hand, but don't
harvest it with a sickle.

—

²⁴·¹If a man marries a woman, but she displeases him
because he finds some indecency in her, then let him
write her a divorce certificate, and send her out of
his house. ²When she leaves his house, she may marry
another man.

²⁴·⁵When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go to
war or be liable for any public duty for one year. He
is free to stay home, so that he can bring joy to his
new wife.

²⁴·⁶Don't take a mill or an upper millstone in
pledge, for that would be taking a life in pledge.

²⁴·¹⁰If you lend anything to your neighbor, don't en-
ter his house to collect his pledge. ¹¹Remain out-
side and let your neighbor bring the pledge out to
you. ¹²If the man is poor, don't keep his pledge o-
vernight. ¹³Return it to him when the sun sets, so
that he may sleep in his cloak and bless you.

²⁴·¹⁴Don't oppress a hired worker who is poor and
needy, whether he is a brother or a foreigner living
in your land. ¹⁵Give him his wages each day before
the sun sets, for he is poor and depends on them;
lest he cry to GOD against you, and you become guilt-
y of sin.

²⁴·¹⁶Fathers shall not be put to death for their chil-
dren, nor children put to death for their fathers.
Each one shall be put to death for his own sin.

²⁴·¹⁷Don't deny justice to a foreigner or an orphan,
and don't take a widow's cloak as a pledge. ¹⁸Remem-
ber that you were a slave in Egypt, and that GOD
redeemed you from there.

²⁴·¹⁹When you reap your harvest and forget a sheaf in
the field, don't go back to get it. Leave it for the
foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, so that GOD may
bless you in all the work of your hands. ²⁰When you
beat the olives from your trees, don't go over the
branches again. ²¹When you gather the grapes from
your vineyard, don't go over the vines again. What re-
mains is for the foreigner, the orphan, and the wid-
ow. ²²Remember that you were a slave in Egypt.

—

²⁵·⁴Don't muzzle the ox while it treads out the
grain.

²⁵·¹³Don't carry differing weights in your bag, one
heavy and one light. ¹⁴Don't have differing measures
in your house, one large and one small. ¹⁵Use accu-
rate and honest weights and measures. ¹⁶For GOD
detests those who are dishonest in such things.

—

²⁶·²Put into a basket some of the first fruit of the
harvest. ³Go to the priest. ⁴The priest shall take
the basket from your hand and set it down before the
altar of GOD. ⁵Say before GOD, “My father was a wan-
dering Aramean. He went down to Egypt with a few peo-
ple, sojourned there, and became a great, mighty, and
populous nation. ⁶The Egyptians mistreated us, humil-
iated us, and imposed hard labor on us. ⁷Then we
cried to GOD, the god of our fathers, and GOD heard
our voice and saw our affliction, our toil, and our
oppression, ⁸GOD brought us out of Egypt with a might-
y hand, an outstretched arm, great deeds of terror,
signs, and wonders. ⁹He brought us to this place and
gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and hon-
ey. ¹⁰I bring the first fruit of the ground, which
you, O GOD, have given me.) Set it before GOD and wor-
ship before GOD. ¹¹You, the Levite, and the foreign-
er shall rejoice in all the good things which GOD has
given to you and your household.

²⁶·¹²When you have finished paying all the tithes of
your produce in the third year, give it to the
Levite, the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, so
that they may eat in your towns and be satisfied.
¹³Say before GOD, “I have taken the sacred portion
out of my house. I have given it to the Levite, the
foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, according to
all the commandments you gave me. I have not
transgressed or forgotten your commandments. ¹⁴I have
not eaten any of the tithe while in mourning, or re-
moved any of it while unclean, or offered any of it
to the dead. I have obeyed GOD. I have done all you
commanded me. ¹⁵Look down from heaven, your holy hab-
itation, and bless your people Israel and the land
you have given us, as you swore to our fathers, a
land flowing with milk and honey.)

