                        Laozi

     An abridgment of the Daodejing. Verse refer-
      ences such as ²·³ indicate the original
     source of the text, but donʼt imply a full
                      quotation.


¹·¹The Way that can be put into words is not the con-
stant Way.

—

²·¹As soon as everyone in the world knows beauty as
beauty, there is already ugliness. ²As soon as every-
one knows good as good, there is bad.

²·³Being and nonbeing produce each other; ⁴difficult
and easy complete each other; ⁵long and short shape
each other; ⁶high and low fill each other; ⁷note and
voice harmonize with each other; ⁸front and back fol-
low each other: ⁹these are constant.

²·¹⁰Therefore the sage dwells in the work of
nonforced action, ¹¹and practices wordless teaching.
¹²All things arise, but he doesnʼt start them; ¹³he
acts on their behalf, but doesnʼt make them depend-
ent; ¹⁴he succeeds, but doesnʼt dwell on it. ¹⁵Itʼs
only because he doesnʼt dwell on it, that it doesnʼt
leave.

—

³·¹By not elevating the worthy, you keep the people
from contention. ²By not valuing rare treasures, you
keep the people from stealing. ³By not displaying
what is desirable, you keep the people from confu-
sion.

³·⁴Therefore the sage governs by clearing the
peopleʼs minds, but filling their bellies; weakening
their ambitions, but strengthening their bones.

³·⁵He constantly keeps the people without cunning and
without desires ⁶so that the intellectuals wonʼt dare
to meddle. ⁷Act without forcing, then everything is
governed properly.

—

⁷·⁵The sage puts himself in the background yet finds
himself in the foreground; ⁶puts himself out of mind
yet finds himself cared for. ⁷Isnʼt it because heʼs
selfless that ⁸heʼs able to achieve his self-
interest?

—

⁸·¹The highest good is like water. ²Waterʼs goodness
is that it benefits all things, ³yet it strives to
dwell in the places that the crowd hates, ⁴therefore
it comes close to the Way.

⁸·⁶In a dwelling, its goodness is location; ⁷in a
mind, depth; ⁸in giving, being like Heaven; ⁹in speak-
ing, sincerity; ¹⁰in government, order; ¹¹in han-
dling affairs, ability; ¹²in action, timeliness.

⁸·¹³Because there is no contention, there is no
blame.

—

⁹·¹If you hold and overfill a cup, itʼs not as good
as stopping short. ²If you hammer and oversharpen a
blade, you canʼt maintain it for long. ³If gold and
jade fill your rooms, no one is able to protect it.
⁴If status and wealth lead to arrogance, you bring
disaster upon yourself.

⁹·⁵When the work is done, withdraw; this is the Way
of Heaven.

—

¹¹·¹Thirty spokes come together at one hub, ²but itʼs
the emptiness inside the hub that makes it useful to
the cart. ³We form clay into a pot, ⁴but itʼs the emp-
tiness inside that makes the clay pot useful. ⁵We
chisel out doors and windows to make a room, ⁶but
itʼs the emptiness inside that makes the room use-
ful.

¹¹·⁷Therefore, what is present brings benefit, ⁸but
what is absent makes it useful.

—

¹⁵·¹In antiquity, those who were good at the Way
²were subtle, wonderful, mysterious, penetrating, and
too deep to know. ³Because they canʼt be known, weʼre
forced to describe their appearance: ⁴Hesitant, as if
crossing a river in winter. ⁵Alert, as if fearing the
neighbors on all sides. ⁶Solemn, like a visiting
guest. ⁷Yielding, like ice about to melt. ⁸Genuine,
like uncarved wood. ⁹Opaque, like muddy water.
¹⁰Vast, like a valley.

¹⁵·¹¹If muddy water is still, it gradually becomes
clear. ¹²If something at rest is moved, it gradually
comes to life.

—

¹⁷·¹With the very best rulers, those below only know
that the rulers exist, ²the next best are the rulers
they love and praise, ³next are the rulers they fear,
⁴and the worst are the rulers they despise.

¹⁷·⁷When the task is accomplished and the work is
done, all the common people say, “We did it our-
selves.”

—

¹⁸·¹Itʼs when the great Way is abandoned that benevo-
lence and righteousness appear. ²Itʼs when learning
and cleverness emerge that the great hypocrisy
appears. ³Itʼs when family relationships are not har-
monious that filial piety and parental compassion ap-
pear. ⁴Itʼs when the country is confused and chaotic
that upright officials appear.

—

¹⁹·⁵Demonstrate plainness, embrace simplicity, have
little selfishness and few desires.

—

²²·¹Bent over then preserved whole; ²crooked then
straight; ³hollow then filled; ⁴worn out then
renewed; ⁵having little then satisfied; ⁶having much
then confused. ⁷Therefore the sage holds to the one
and becomes shepherd to the world.

²²·⁸He doesnʼt promote himself, so heʼs acknowl-
edged. ⁹He doesnʼt display himself, so he shines
brightly. ¹⁰He doesnʼt brag about himself, so he has
merit. ¹¹Heʼs not boastful, so he can endure. ¹²Itʼs
only because he doesnʼt contend that no one can con-
tend with him.

—

²³·¹Itʼs natural to speak rarely. ²A violent wind
doesnʼt last all morning. ³A torrential rain doesnʼt
last all day. ⁵If heaven and earth canʼt sustain it
for long, how much less can man?

—

²⁴·¹He who blows hard canʼt stand. ²He who promotes
himself isnʼt acknowledged. ³He who displays himself
doesnʼt shine brightly. ⁵He who brags about himself
has no merit. ⁶He who boasts about himself wonʼt en-
dure. ⁸These are so despised that even those who want
things donʼt abide them.

—

²⁷·¹A skillful traveler leaves no ruts or tracks. ²A
skillful speaker makes no slips or gaffes. ³A skill-
ful counter needs no tallies or papers.

²⁷·⁶The sage is always skillful at saving people, and
never abandons anyone; ⁷with things, he never
abandons valuable property.

²⁷·⁹Skillful people are the teachers of skillful peo-
ple; ¹⁰unskilled people are the raw materials of
skillful people. ¹¹He who doesnʼt value his teacher
and cherish his raw materials is greatly confused, no
matter how clever he is.

—

²⁹·¹Those who want to take the world and rule it, ²I
see that they wonʼt succeed. ³The world is a sacred
vessel, ⁴and it canʼt be ruled. ⁵Those who rule it ru-
in it. ⁶Those who hold it lose it.

²⁹·⁷Itʼs the nature of things that some lead and some
follow, ⁸some blow hot and some blow cold, ⁹some are
strong and some are weak, ¹⁰some cultivate and some
deteriorate. ¹¹Therefore the sage avoids extremes, ar-
rogance, and extravagance.

—

³⁰·¹Those with the Way who assist the ruler donʼt use
the force of arms to conquer the world; ²such methods
would only backfire. ³Wherever armies camp, brambles
and thorns will grow.

³⁰·⁵A skillful leader achieves results then stops,
⁶and doesnʼt use the occasion to sieze power. ⁷He
achieves results without arrogance. ⁸He achieves
results without praising his deeds. ⁹He achieves
results without boasting. ¹⁰He achieves results only
as a last resort.

—

³¹·¹The military is an ominous instrument. ²Itʼs so
despised that even those who want things donʼt abide
it.

³¹·⁵The military is an ominous instrument, ⁶so only
use it as a last resort; ⁷with calm detachment is
best. ⁸Donʼt glorify it; ⁹to glorify it would be to
delight in killing people. ¹⁰He who delights in kill-
ing people canʼt achieve his ambitions in the world.
¹⁶When many people have been killed, ¹⁷weep for them
with sorrow. ¹⁸When the war has been won, treat it
like a funeral ceremony.

—

³³·¹He who knows others is intelligent; ²he who knows
himself is enlightened. ³He who overcomes others is
forceful; ⁴he who overcomes himself is powerful. ⁵He
who knows contentment is rich.

—

³⁴·¹The Way floats and drifts; ²it can go left or
right. ⁴When the task is accomplished and the work is
done, it claims no credit.

³⁴·⁵All things turn to it ⁶and yet it doesnʼt act as
their master, ⁸so it can be called a small thing.

³⁴·⁹All things turn to it ¹⁰and yet it doesnʼt act as
their master, ¹¹so it can be called a great thing.

³⁴·¹²Thatʼs why the sage is able to accomplish great
things: ¹³he doesnʼt try to do great things, there-
fore he accomplishes great things.

—

³⁵·³Coming to you, the world suffers no harm, but
finds safety and peace.

³⁵·⁴Passing travelers will stop for music and food.
⁵But if the Way were described, ⁶it would seem insip-
id and without flavor. ⁷When you look at it, itʼs not
sufficient to be seen; ⁸when you listen to it, itʼs
not sufficient to be heard; ⁹yet when you use it, it
canʼt be exhausted.

—

³⁶·¹If you want to shrink something, ²it must first
be expanded; ³if you want to weaken something, ⁴it
must first be strengthened; ⁵if you want to leave
something, ⁶it must first be joined; ⁷if you want to
take something away, ⁸it must first be given.

—

³⁸·¹A man of superior virtue doesnʼt cling to vir-
tue, ²therefore he has true virtue. ⁵A man of superi-
or virtue acts without force, ⁶and without an agen-
da.

³⁸·¹⁶Therefore, after losing the Way there is vir-
tue; ¹⁷after losing virtue there is benevolence; ¹⁸af-
ter losing benevolence there is righteousness; ¹⁹af-
ter losing righteousness there is propriety.

³⁸·²⁰As for propriety, itʼs a thin veneer of loyalty
and sincerity, ²¹and the beginning of disorder.

³⁸·²⁴Therefore a truly great man dwells in the thick
substance, ²⁵not in the thin veneer; ²⁶in the fruit,
not in the flower.

—

⁴³·¹The softest, most pliable thing in the world
²runs roughshod over the hardest, most solid thing in
the world. ³That which has no substance enters into
that which has no openings. ⁴Thatʼs how I know the
benefits of nonforced action.

⁴³·⁵Teachings that use no words, ⁶and the benefits of
nonforced action: ⁷few in the world can understand
them.

—

⁴⁴·⁴Excessive attachment comes at great cost, ⁵and
great accumulation leads to heavy loss. ⁶Therefore,
knowing contentment avoids disgrace, ⁷and knowing
when to stop avoids danger; ⁸thus you can endure for
a long time.

—

⁴⁶·¹When the world has the Way, ²fine horses are rel-
egated to fertilizing the fields. ³When the world
lacks the Way, ⁴warhorses are bred just outside the
city walls.

⁴⁶·⁵There is no greater crime than desire. ⁶There is
no greater disaster than being discontent. ⁷There is
no greater fault than wanting more. ⁸Therefore the
satisfaction that comes from being content is last-
ing satisfaction.

—

⁴⁷·¹You donʼt have to go out the door to know the
world. ²You donʼt have to peek out the window to know
the Way of Heaven. ³The farther you go, the less you
know.

⁴⁷·⁴Therefore the sage doesnʼt travel but knows;
⁵doesnʼt look, but discerns; ⁶and doesnʼt do, but
succeeds.

—

⁴⁸·¹He who pursues learning gains something each day.
²He who hears the Way loses something each day. ³He
loses, and loses again, until he acts without force.
⁴He acts without force and yet nothing is left un-
done.

⁴⁸·⁵If you want to rule the world, constantly avoid
interfering with it. ⁶If you interfere, youʼre unfit
to rule the world.

—

⁴⁹·¹The sage constantly has no mind of his own. ²He
takes the mind of the people as his mind.

⁴⁹·³Heʼs good to good people ⁴and also good to bad
people, ⁵thus he gains in goodness. ⁶He trusts trust-
worthy people ⁷and also trusts untrustworthy people,
⁸thus he gains in trust.

—

⁵³·¹If I had the least bit of knowledge, ²I would
walk on the great Way ³and my only fear would be
straying from it. ⁴The great Way is very much level,
⁵but people very much prefer mountain trails.

⁵³·⁶The court is full of splendor, ⁷but the fields
are full of weeds, ⁸and the granaries are full of
nothing; ⁹their clothes are embroidered and color-
ful, ¹⁰their belts have sharp swords, ¹¹theyʼre
stuffed with food, ¹²and have money and possessions
in excess: ¹³this is called robbery, ¹⁴and robbery is
certainly not the Way.

—

⁵⁶·¹Those who know it, donʼt talk about it; ²those
who talk about it, donʼt know it.

—

⁵⁷·¹Govern the state with justice, ²deploy the mili-
tary with surprise, ³and take the world without in-
terference. ⁴How do I know this? From the following:

⁵⁷·⁵The world has many prohibitions and taboos, ⁶and
yet the people are full of poverty. ⁷The people have
many beneficial tools, ⁸and yet the state and family
are increasingly faint. ⁹People have many clever
tricks, ¹⁰and yet strange things increasingly hap-
pen. ¹¹The laws are increasingly publicized, ¹²and
yet there are many thieves and robbers.

⁵⁷·¹³Therefore, in the words of the sage: ¹⁴“I act
without force, and the people transform themselves.
¹⁵I enjoy quiet, and the people correct themselves.
¹⁶I donʼt intefere, and the people prosper them-
selves. ¹⁷I have no desires, and the people simplify
themselves.”

—

⁵⁸·⁵Good fortune perches on misfortune; ⁶misfortune
lurks beneath good fortune. ⁷Who knows where it will
end?

⁵⁸·⁸Nothing is obvious. ⁹Obvious again becomes sur-
prising; ¹⁰good again becomes monstrous. ¹¹The peo-
ple have been confused for a long time.

—

⁵⁹·¹In governing the people and serving Heaven,
²there is nothing like frugality. ³Only with frugali-
ty can you submit early. ⁴Submitting early is called
repeatedly accumulating virtue. ⁵If you repeatedly ac-
cumulate virtue, then there is nothing you canʼt o-
vercome.

—

⁶²·²The Way is the treasure of a good man, ³and the
shelter of a bad man.

⁶²·⁴Beautiful words can buy honor, ⁵and good deeds
can raise you above others.

⁶²·⁶Even if a man is bad, how can you abandon him?

⁶²·⁷At the emperorʼs coronation, ⁹offering jade discs
brought in by a team of horses ¹⁰is not as good as
sitting still and offering this Way.

⁶²·¹¹Why was this Way so valuable to the ancients?
¹²Isnʼt it said, “Those who seek, with this will ob-
tain, ¹³and those who have guilt, with this will es-
cape”? ¹⁴Therefore itʼs the most valuable thing in
the world.

—

⁶³·¹Act without forcing, ²serve without interfering,
³savor the flavorless, ⁴consider the small as great
and the few as many, ⁵respond to resentment with vir-
tue.

⁶³·⁶Plan for something difficult while itʼs still eas-
y. ⁷Deal with something great while itʼs still small.
⁸The difficult things of the world start off easy.
⁹The great things of the world start off small.
¹⁰Therefore, the sage never does great things, ¹¹and
thus he is able to accomplish great things.

⁶³·¹²He who makes promises lightly is sure to have
little trust, ¹³and he who treats many things as eas-
y is sure to have many difficulties. ¹⁴Therefore, the
sage treats things as difficult, ¹⁵and thus, in the
end, nothing is difficult.

—

⁶⁴·¹Itʼs easy to hold what is at rest. ²Itʼs easy to
plan for what hasnʼt begun. ³Itʼs easy to break what
is brittle. ⁴Itʼs easy to scatter what is tiny. ⁵Deal
with it before it happens; ⁶manage it before itʼs cha-
otic.

⁶⁴·⁷A tree thatʼs thick enough to embrace rises from
a tiny shoot. ⁸A terrace thatʼs nine stories tall
rises from a heap of earth. ⁹A wall thatʼs three hun-
dred yards high begins at the ground beneath your
feet.

⁶⁴·¹⁰Those who rule it ruin it. ¹¹Those who hold it
lose it. ¹²Therefore, the sage rules nothing and thus
ruins nothing. ¹³He holds on to nothing and thus
loses nothing.

⁶⁴·¹⁴People usually fail in their endeavors on the
verge of success. ¹⁵Therefore we say, “If youʼre as
careful at the end as you are at the beginning,
¹⁶youʼll have no failure.”

⁶⁴·¹⁷The sage desires not to desire, ¹⁸and doesnʼt
value goods that are hard to obtain; ¹⁹he learns not
to study, ²⁰and returns to what the multitude has
passed over. ²¹He could help all things to be natu-
ral, ²²but dares not do it.

—

⁶⁶·¹The rivers and lakes are able to be the kings of
the valleys ²because of their skill at being low.
⁴Therefore, wanting to be above the people, the sage
must speak to them humbly from below; ⁵wanting to be
before the people, he must put himself behind them.
⁶Therefore, he dwells above them yet the people donʼt
feel that heʼs a burden. ⁷He dwells before them yet
the people donʼt feel that heʼs an obstruction. ⁸Eve-
ryone in the world delights in promoting him and nev-
er tires of him.

⁶⁶·⁹Itʼs because he doesnʼt contend ¹⁰that no one in
the world can contend with him.

—

⁶⁷·⁴I constantly have three treasures which I hold
and treasure: ⁵the first is compassion, ⁶the second
is frugality, ⁷the third is not daring to be preemi-
nent in the world. ⁸Itʼs because of compassion that I
can be courageous; ⁹itʼs because of frugality that I
can be generous; ¹⁰itʼs because of not daring to be
preeminent in the world that I can be head of all
things.

⁶⁷·¹¹Now, abandoning compassion to be courageous,
¹²abandoning frugality to be generous, ¹³abandoning
the rear to be in front: ¹⁴this is courting death.

—

⁶⁸·¹A skillful warrior doesnʼt show his might. ²A
skillful fighter doesnʼt get angry. ³A skillful vic-
tor doesnʼt engage his enemy. ⁴A skillful employer
places himself below others.

—

⁷³·¹Those who are brave in daring will die; ²those
who are brave in caution will live. ³In these two
cases, one is beneficial and the other is harmful.
⁴Who understands why Heaven hates what it does?

⁷³·⁶The Way of Heaven doesnʼt fight yet wins skill-
fully, ⁷doesnʼt speak yet responds skillfully, ⁸is-
nʼt summoned yet comes on its own, ⁹is at ease yet
plans skillfully.

⁷³·¹⁰The net of Heaven is vast; it has a coarse mesh
yet nothing slips through.

—

⁷⁵·¹The people starve because those above consume too
much in taxes. ²The people rebel because those above
interfere. ³The people scoff at death because those a-
bove demand so much from life.

—

⁷⁶·¹While living, a man is supple and soft, ²but once
dead, he is hard and rigid. ³While living, all
things, grasses, and trees are supple and crisp, ⁴but
once dead, they are withered and dry.

⁷⁶·⁵Therefore it is said: those who are hard and rig-
id are the followers of death; ⁶those who are supple
and soft are the followers of life. ⁷Therefore, a rig-
id army wonʼt win, ⁸and a rigid tree will snap.

—

⁷⁷·¹The Way of Heaven is like an archer drawing his
bow. ²If itʼs too high, he presses down; if itʼs too
low, he lifts up; ³if there is excess, he reduces it;
⁴if there is not enough, he adds to it. ⁵The Way of
Heaven is also to reduce what has excess and add to
what doesnʼt have enough.

⁷⁷·⁶The Way of man is different: ⁷he reduces what
doesnʼt have enough and offers it to that which has
excess.

⁷⁷·⁸Who can have excess and offer it to Heaven? ⁹On-
ly he who has the Way.

⁷⁷·¹⁰Therefore, the sage takes actions without
claiming the results; ¹¹he succeeds without dwelling
on it; ¹²similarly, he doesnʼt desire to make a dis-
play of his worthiness.

—

⁷⁹·¹When harmony is made after great resentment,
²there is always some resentment remaining. ³How can
this be considered good? ⁴Therefore, the sage keeps
his part of the contract, but makes no demands on the
other party.

⁷⁹·⁷The Way of Heaven has no favorites, ⁸itʼs con-
stantly on the side of the good man.

—

⁸⁰·¹Let there be a small state with few people. ²Let
them have powerful tools and not use them. ³Let the
people take death seriously and not migrate far a-
way. ⁴There are boats and vehicles but no reason to
ride them. ⁵There are armor and weapons but no rea-
son to parade them. ⁶Let the people keep their
records with knotted string again. ⁷Their food is
sweet, ⁸their clothes are beautiful, ⁹their homes are
secure, ¹⁰and their customs are enjoyable.

⁸⁰·¹¹Neighboring states can see each other, ¹²they
can hear each otherʼs dogs and roosters, ¹³yet the
people grow old and die ¹⁴without any dealings be-
tween each other.

—

⁸¹·¹Credible words arenʼt eloquent; ²eloquent words
arenʼt credible. ³The skillful arenʼt polymaths;
⁴those who are polymaths arenʼt skillful. ⁵Those who
know arenʼt learned; ⁶the learned donʼt know.

⁸¹·⁷The sage accumulates nothing. ⁸The more he does
for others, the greater his possessions. ⁹The more he
gives to others, the greater his abundance.

⁸¹·¹⁰Therefore, the Way of Heaven is to benefit with-
out harming. ¹¹The Way of the sage is to act without
contending.
