                      Confucius

     An abridgment of the Analects. Verse refer-
      ences such as ¹·³ indicate the original
     source of the text, but donʼt imply a full
                      quotation.


¹·¹Isnʼt it a pleasure to learn something, then to ap-
ply it at the right time? Isnʼt it a joy to have
friends come from afar? Isnʼt he a superior man who
takes no offense when his merits are ignored?

¹·³Cunning words and an ingratiating appearance rare-
ly accompany benevolence.

¹·⁵The Way to guide a state of a thousand chariots:
be attentive to business and trustworthy; be frugal
in expenditures and love your fellow men; only mobi-
lize the common people at the proper time of year.

¹·⁶A young man should respect his parents at home, re-
spect his elders abroad, say little but be trustwor-
thy, love the people at large but be intimate with
the benevolent. If he still has energy to spare, let
him study literature.

¹·¹⁰Ziqin asked Zigong, “When Confucius arrives in a
country, he always learns about its government. Does
he seek out this information or is it given to him?”
Zigong replied, “Confucius obtains it by being cor-
dial, upright, respectful, frugal, and deferential.
He seeks it differently than other men do.”

¹·¹⁴A superior man seeks neither a full stomach nor
comfortable lodgings. He is diligent in his actions
but cautious in his speech. He associates with those
who know the Way in order to be put right. Such a man
may be said to love learning.

¹·¹⁶Donʼt worry that men donʼt recognize your mer-
its; worry that you donʼt recognize theirs.

—

²·¹He who governs by virtue is like the North Star:
it stays in its place while all the other stars pay
homage to it.

²·³If you lead the people with edicts and keep them
orderly with punishments, they will evade the punish-
ment and have no sense of shame. If you lead them
with virtue and keep them orderly with propriety,
they will have a sense of shame and order them-
selves.

²·⁶Meng Wubo asked about filial piety. Confucius
said, “Give your parents nothing to worry about oth-
er than illness.”

²·⁷Ziyou asked about filial piety. Confucius said,
“Nowadays filial piety only means being able to feed
your parents. But even dogs and horses receive this
much care. Without respect, whatʼs the difference?”

²·⁸Zixia asked about filial piety. Confucius said,
“Itʼs the expression on your face thatʼs difficult to
manage. Itʼs not filial piety merely for the young to
shoulder the burden when there is work to do, and to
defer to their elders when there is wine and food a-
vailable.”

²·¹⁰Look at the means a man employs. Observe his
motives. Examine what gives him comfort. How can a
man conceal his character?

²·¹¹If a man learns the new by reviewing the old, he
is worthy to be a teacher.

²·¹³A superior man acts before he speaks, and then
speaks according to his actions. ¹⁴A superior man is
inclusive and not partisan, while an inferior man is
the opposite.

²·¹⁵Learning without thinking is a waste. Thinking
without learning is dangerous.

²·¹⁷Knowledge is to know when you know something, and
to know when you donʼt.

²·¹⁸Zizhang was studying in order to get an official
position. Confucius said, “If you listen much, put a-
side what is doubtful, and speak cautiously about the
rest, you will make few mistakes. If you observe
much, put aside what is perilous, and act cautiously
on the rest, you will have few regrets. Few mistakes
in speech, few regrets in action: an official posi-
tion will follow.”

²·¹⁹If you raise up the straight and place them over
the crooked, the people will follow you. If you raise
up the crooked and place them over the straight, the
people will not follow you.

²·²⁰Ji Kangzi asked, “How can I encourage the people
to be respectful, loyal, and diligent?” Confucius
said, “Approach them with dignity then they will be
respectful. Be filial and kind then they will be loy-
al. Raise up the good and instruct the incompetent
then they will be diligent.”

²·²¹Someone asked Confucius, “Why donʼt you engage in
government?” Confucius said, “The Book of Documents
says, ‘Just by being filial and being friendly to
your brothers you will have an effect on govern-
ment.’ Since this is also engaging in government, why
do I need to ‘engage in government’?”

²·²²I donʼt know what to do with an untrustworthy
man. How can you pull a wagon thatʼs missing its yoke
pin?

²·²⁴To see what is right and not to do it is a lack
of courage.

—

³·³If a man is not benevolent, what can he do with
propriety?

³·⁴In ritual, prefer frugality to extravagance. In
funerals, prefer grief to formality.

³·¹²If I donʼt participate in a sacrifice, itʼs as if
I have not sacrificed at all.

³·¹⁵When Confucius entered the Grand Temple, he asked
questions about everything. Someone remarked, “Who
says that Confucius knows about ritual? When visiting
the Grand Temple, he asked questions about every-
thing.” Confucius, hearing this, said, “This is the
ritual.”

³·²¹Donʼt explain away what is already done. Donʼt ar-
gue against what is already accomplished. Donʼt as-
sign blame for what is already past.

³·²⁶Holding a high position without tolerance, per-
forming ritual without reverence, joining a funeral
without grief: how can I look at such things?

—

⁴·¹It is benevolence that makes a neighborhood beau-
tiful. How can a man be considered wise if he chooses
not to reside among benevolence?

⁴·²Those who lack benevolence can endure neither ad-
versity nor enjoyment for long. The benevolent are
content with benevolence. The wise cultivate benevo-
lence for its advantage.

⁴·⁴If you set your heart on benevolence, you will be
free from evil.

⁴·⁵All men desire wealth and honor, but if they are
obtained by not following the Way, they should not be
kept. All men hate poverty and disgrace, but if they
canʼt be avoided by following the Way, they should
not be avoided. If a superior man abandons benevo-
lence, how is he worthy of that name? A superior man
never leaves benevolence even for the space of a sin-
gle meal. In moments of haste, he acts according to
it. In times of difficulty, he acts according to it.

⁴·⁶One who really loves benevolence puts nothing a-
bove it. One who really hates what is not benevolent
would not allow it to approach him. Has anyone devot-
ed all his strength to benevolence for a single day?
I havenʼt seen anyone who lacked the strength to do
so.

⁴·⁷People make errors according to the type of per-
son they are. Observe their errors and you can know
their degree of benevolence.

⁴·⁹A gentleman who sets his heart on the Way, but is
ashamed of poor clothes and poor food, is not worth
engaging in discussion.

⁴·¹⁰When a superior man deals with the world he is
not invariably for or against anything. He sides with
what is right.

⁴·¹¹A superior man cherishes virtue; an inferior man
cherishes land. A superior man cherishes justice; an
inferior man cherishes favors.

⁴·¹²One who acts out of personal profit incurs much
resentment.

⁴·¹⁴Donʼt worry that you have no position; worry a-
bout what it takes to merit one. Donʼt worry that no
one knows you; seek to be worth knowing.

⁴·¹⁶A superior man understands what is right. An in-
ferior man understands personal profit.

⁴·¹⁷When you see a worthy man, think of becoming his
equal; when you see an unworthy man, look within and
examine yourself.

⁴·¹⁸In serving your parents, you may admonish them
gently; if you see that they donʼt follow your ad-
vice, remain respectful, donʼt become disobedient,
and work without complaining.

⁴·²²The ancients were reluctant to speak because they
would have been ashamed if their actions didnʼt live
up to their words.

⁴·²³One rarely misses the mark because of self-
control.

⁴·²⁴A superior man wants to be slow in speech but
quick in action.

—

⁵·⁵What is the use of eloquence? Those who give a
quick retort often incur the hatred of others.

⁵·¹⁰Zai Yu was sleeping during the day. Confucius
said, “Rotten wood cannot be carved, and a wall of ma-
nure cannot be troweled. What is the use of scolding
Zai Yu? I used to listen to what people said and
trust them to act accordingly. Now I listen to what
people say and watch what they do. It is because of
Zai Yu that I have changed.”

⁵·¹¹I havenʼt seen a truly steadfast man. How can a
man who is full of desires be steadfast?

⁵·¹⁵Kong the Refined was mentally quick, fond of
learning, and not ashamed to ask questions of his
inferiors. Thatʼs why he was called “Refined”.

⁵·¹⁶Zi Chan had four characteristics of the Way of a
superior man: he was respectful in his private con-
duct, respectful in serving his superiors, generous
in caring for the people, and just in employing the
people.

⁵·¹⁷Yang Ping Zhong excelled in his relations with
others. Even after long acquaintance he continued to
treat them with respect.

⁵·²⁰Ji Wen Zi always thought three times before act-
ing. Hearing this, Confucius said, “Twice is e-
nough.”

⁵·²³Bo Yi and Shu Qi did not remember old grievances,
so there was little resentment against them.

⁵·²⁵Glib talk, an ingratiating expression, and obse-
quious conduct: I am ashamed of such behavior. Act-
ing friendly towards someone while concealing your re-
sentment for them: I am ashamed of such behavior.

⁵·²⁶My heartʼs desire is to bring peace to the old,
to share trust with my friends, and to cherish the
young.

⁵·²⁷I have not yet met anyone who can see his own
faults and inwardly accuse himself.

—

⁶·³Yanhui loved learning. He never took his anger out
on others, and never made the same mistake twice.
¹¹How admirable he was! He lived on a bowlful of rice
to eat, a ladleful of water to drink, and a hovel for
shelter. Others could not have endured such misery,
yet Yanhuiʼs joy was unchanged.

⁶·¹²Ran Qiu said, “Itʼs not that I donʼt enjoy your
Way, but I donʼt have the strength to follow it.” Con-
fucius said, “Those who donʼt have the strength col-
lapse along the way, but you have drawn a line be-
fore starting.”

⁶·¹⁵Meng Zhifan was not boastful. He once held the
rear during a retreat. As they reached the city gate,
he whipped his horse, saying, “Itʼs not that I dared
to be last, only that my horse wouldnʼt go.”

⁶·¹⁸When natural disposition prevails over refine-
ment, you get a savage. When refinement prevails o-
ver natural disposition, you get a pedantic clerk.
When natural disposition and refinement are properly
blended, you get a superior man.

⁶·²⁸If I have done wrong, may Heaven detest and aban-
don me!

—

⁷·²Itʼs natural for me to store up knowledge silent-
ly, to learn without satiety, and to teach others
without weariness.

⁷·³My worries are failure to cultivate virtue, fail-
ure to explore what I learn, inability to follow what
is right when I hear it, and inability to change what
is not good.

⁷·⁶Set your heart on the Way. Base yourself in vir-
tue. Rely on benevolence. Enjoy the arts.

⁷·⁷I have never denied instruction to anyone, even if
his own resources could only afford a bundle of dried
meat for tuition.

⁷·⁸I only enlighten those who are driven by eager-
ness to learn and who are anxiously trying to ex-
plain their ideas. If I lift up one corner and they
cannot come back with the other three, I donʼt re-
peat myself.

⁷·⁹When Confucius was eating in the presence of a
mourner, he never ate his fill.

⁷·¹¹Few have the ability to act when employed and to
hide when dismissed. If I were commanding the Three
Armies, who would I take with me? A man who would
wrestle a tiger with bare hands or cross a river on
foot, dying without regret—I would not take that man.
It must be someone who approaches a task with appre-
hension, likes to make plans, and can execute them
successfully.

⁷·¹²If wealth can be sought decently, I will do so, e-
ven if I have to have a lowly job. If it cannot be
sought decently, I will follow what I love.

⁷·¹⁵Bo Yi and Shu Qi sought benevolence and got it.
Why should they have complaints?

⁷·¹⁶Coarse rice to eat, water to drink, and your bent
arm for a pillow—there is still joy in the midst of
these things. Wealth and honor obtained by unright-
eous means are like fleeting clouds to me.

⁷·¹⁷Give me a few more years; if I can study until
fifty, I may be free from great mistakes.

⁷·¹⁹Iʼm the kind of man who is so eager for knowl-
edge that he forgets to eat, who is so joyful that he
forgets to worry, and who is not aware that old age
is coming.

⁷·²⁰I was not born with knowledge, but I love antiq-
uity and earnestly seek it.

⁷·²²When walking with any two people, they must have
something to teach me. I select their strengths and
follow them, their weaknesses and correct myself.

⁷·²³Heaven gave birth to the virtue in me. What can
angry rulers do to me?

⁷·²⁴My friends, I hide nothing from you. Whatever I
do, I share with you. That is who I am.

⁷·²⁶I canʼt hope to meet a sage, but I would be con-
tent to meet a superior man. I canʼt hope to meet a
truly good man, but I would be content to meet a
steadfast man. It is hard to be steadfast when noth-
ing pretends to be something, emptiness pretends to
be fullness, and poverty pretends to be comfort.

⁷·²⁷Confucius fished with a line, but didnʼt use a
net. He hunted, but didnʼt shoot roosting birds.

⁷·²⁸There may be those who can act without knowl-
edge, but I am not one of them. I hear much, select
what is good, and follow it. I see much, and remem-
ber it.

⁷·²⁹To approve of a manʼs visit doesnʼt mean approv-
ing of what he does after he leaves. When a man
purifies himself to approach me, I approve of his pu-
rity without endorsing his past or his future.

⁷·³⁰Is benevolence far away? As soon as I want benev-
olence, it is at hand.

⁷·³¹Iʼm fortunate. When I make a mistake, others al-
ways notice it.

⁷·³⁴How would I dare claim to be benevolent or a
sage? Rather, it may be said that I strive for them
without flagging, and teach others without weari-
ness.

⁷·³⁶Extravagance leads to arrogance; frugality leads
to stinginess. Itʼs better to be stingy than arro-
gant.

⁷·³⁷A superior man is easygoing and unperturbed. An
inferior man is always tense and anxious.

⁷·³⁸Confucius was warm yet stern; authoritative but
not fierce; respectful yet at ease.

—

⁸·¹Tai Bo can be said to have had the highest vir-
tue. Three times he declined his claim to the king-
dom.

⁸·²Courtesy without propriety is tiresome. Caution
without propriety is timidity. Bravery without pro-
priety is chaos. Candor without propriety is rude-
ness.

⁸·⁹The people can be made to follow a path, but they
canʼt be made to understand it.

⁸·¹⁰A man who loves bravery and hates poverty will
proceed to unruly behavior. A man without benevo-
lence who is despised by others too much will pro-
ceed to unruly behavior.

⁸·¹¹If a man had talents as admirable as the Duke of
Zhou, but was arrogant and stingy, the rest would not
be worth noticing.

⁸·¹³Have sincere faith, love learning, and defend the
good Way unto death. Donʼt enter a state that is in
peril, and donʼt stay in one that is in chaos. Show
yourself when the Way prevails in the world, but hide
when it does not. When the Way prevails in the state,
it is shameful to be poor and humble. When the Way
does not prevail in the state, it is shameful to be
rich and noble.

⁸·¹⁴Donʼt plan the policies of a position that you
donʼt hold.

⁸·²¹I can find no fault in Yu. His food and drink
were frugal, yet his offerings to the spirits and
gods showed utter devotion. His clothes were coarse,
yet his ritual cap and robes were magnificent. His
dwelling was humble, yet he exhausted his strength on
irrigation ditches and canals.

—

⁹·³The rules of ritual prescribe a hemp cap. Nowa-
days it is made of silk. That is more frugal. I fol-
low the common practice. The rules of ritual pre-
scribe bowing below the steps. Nowadays people bow af-
ter ascending. That is arrogant. Although it goes a-
gainst the common practice, I bow below the steps.

⁹·⁴Confucius forbade four things: donʼt act on specu-
lation, donʼt demand certainty, donʼt be stubborn,
and donʼt be egotistical.

⁹·⁵When Confucius was in danger in Kuang, he said,
“Since King Wen died, doesnʼt his culture reside in
me? If Heaven doesnʼt want this culture destroyed,
what can the people of Kuang do to me?”

⁹·⁶I was poor when I was young, so I learned many me-
nial skills. Must a superior man be skilled in many
things? No, not many.

⁹·⁸Do I have knowledge? No, I do not. A rustic asked
me a question and my mind went blank. I hammered at
both ends of the question until I got everything out
of it.

⁹·¹³Zigong asked, “If you had a beautiful piece of
jade here, would you hide it safely in a box or try
to get a good price and sell it?” Confucius said,
“Sell it! All Iʼm waiting for is the right offer.”

⁹·¹⁶I have no difficulty serving high officials when
abroad, serving my elders at home, giving my best
efforts in funeral arrangements, and avoiding trou-
ble from wine.

⁹·¹⁸I have never seen a man who loves virtue as much
as he loves beauty in women.

⁹·¹⁹Itʼs like building a mound: if I stop before the
last basket of earth, it remains unfinished. Itʼs
like filling a ditch: although Iʼve dumped in only a
single basket of earth, if I continue then Iʼm mak-
ing progress.

⁹·²³The younger generation should be held in awe. How
do we know that it will not equal the present one?
But if a man reaches forty or fifty years old with-
out distinguishing himself, he no longer deserves
awe.

⁹·²⁴I can do nothing with the man who enjoys polite
words without unfolding their purpose, or who agrees
with exemplary words without reforming himself.

⁹·²⁵Put loyalty and trustworthiness above everything
else. Only have friends who are your moral equals.
When you make a mistake, donʼt be afraid to correct
it.

⁹·³⁰You may be able to study together, and yet be un-
able to pursue the Way together. You may be able to
pursue the Way together, and yet be unable to take a
stand together. You may be able to take a stand to-
gether, and yet be unable to share authority togeth-
er.

—

¹⁰·¹In his village, Confucius was most deferential,
as if he were unable to speak. In the ancestral tem-
ple or at court, he was eloquent but cautious.

¹⁰·⁸Even if there was plenty of meat, he would not
eat more meat than rice. Only with wine did he have
no set limit, but he never drank to the point of con-
fusion.

¹⁰·¹⁰He didnʼt converse while eating, or talk in bed.
¹¹Even with a simple meal of coarse rice and vegeta-
ble broth, he made an offering with solemnity. ¹²He
would not sit unless his mat was in proper position.

¹⁰·¹⁷When the stables burned, Confucius returned from
court and asked, “Was anyone hurt?” He didnʼt ask a-
bout the horses.

¹⁰·²²When a friend died who had no family to make
arrangements, he said, “Let the funeral be at my
home.”

—

¹¹·⁴Yan Hui is no help to me. Everything I say
pleases him.

¹¹·¹²If you arenʼt yet able to serve people, how
would you be able to serve the spirits. If you donʼt
yet understand life, how could you understand death?

¹¹·¹⁴The people of Lu were rebuilding the Long Treas-
ury. Min Ziqian said, “Why not restore the old struc-
ture? Why must it be changed completely?” Confucius
said, “This man either says nothing, or his words hit
the mark.”

¹¹·¹⁶Going too far is as bad as falling short.

¹¹·²¹If a manʼs opinions are sound, is he a superior
man or is it only a solemn appearance?

¹¹·²²Zilu asked, “Should I immediately put into prac-
tice what I learn?” Confucius said, “You have a fa-
ther and elder brothers to consult first.” Ranyou
asked the same question. Confucius said, “You should
immediately put into practice what you learn.” Gongxi
Hua said, “Iʼm confused. May I ask for an explana-
tion?” Confucius said, “Ranyou holds back, so I urged
him forward. Zilu has energy for two, so I held him
back.”

—

¹²·¹Yan Hui asked about benevolence. Confucius said,
“Benevolence is overcoming oneself and returning to
propriety. Benevolence comes from oneself. How could
it come from others? Donʼt look at anything improp-
er. Donʼt listen to anything improper. Donʼt say any-
thing improper. Donʼt do anything improper.”

¹²·²Zhonggong asked about benevolence. Confucius
said, “When abroad, behave as if you were receiving
an important guest. When employing the people, be-
have as if you were assisting at an important sacri-
fice. Donʼt impose on others what you donʼt want for
yourself.”

¹²·³Sima Niu asked about benevolence. Confucius said,
“A benevolent person is reluctant to speak. When do-
ing it is difficult, how can you not be reluctant to
speak about it.”

¹²·⁴Sima Niu asked about the superior man. Confucius
said, “A superior man is free from worry and fear. If
introspection finds nothing to be ashamed of, why
should he have worry or fear?”

¹²·⁶Zizhang asked about discernment. Confucius said,
“He who is not influenced by slander that saturates
and by accusations that spread like a rash, can be
called discerning. He can also be called farsight-
ed.”

¹²·⁷Zigong asked about government. Confucius said,
“Sufficient food, sufficient arms, and the trust of
the people. If I had to give up one of these three, I
would give up the arms. If I had to give up one of
the remaining two, I would give up the food. Death
has been with us since ancient times, but without
trust the people cannot stand.”

¹²·¹⁰Zizhang asked about accumulating virtue. Confu-
cius said, “Make these your guiding principles: loy-
alty, trustworthiness, and following what is right.
This is the way to accumulate virtue.”

¹²·¹³In hearing lawsuits, I am the same as anyone.
What we need is to make it so that there are no
lawsuits.

¹²·¹⁴Zizhang asked about government. Confucius said,
“Ponder it without tiring, and carry it out with loy-
alty.”

¹²·¹⁵Study culture broadly, and restrain yourself
with propriety. You will not stray from what is
right.

¹²·¹⁶The superior man perfects the good in people, he
does not perfect the bad. The inferior man does the
opposite.

¹²·¹⁹Ji Kangzi asked Confucius about government:
“What if I were to kill those who donʼt follow the
Way in order to help those who do?” Confucius said,
“In administering your government, what use is kill-
ing? If you desire what is good, the people will be
good. The virtue of the superior man is like the
wind, and the virtue of the inferior man is like the
grass. When the wind blows, the grass is sure to
bend.”

¹²·²⁰Zizhang asked, “When can a gentleman be called
distinguished? By this I mean that he is sure to be
known in his state and in his clan.” Confucius said,
“That is fame, not distinction. A distinguished man
has upright character, loves what is right, examines
what people say and observes their facial
expressions, and is mindful of deference to others.
Such a man will be distinguished in his state and in
his clan. As for fame, it is enough to be wholly con-
fident about assuming the appearance of benevolence
while acting to the contrary. Such a man is sure to
be known in his state and in his clan.”

¹²·²¹Fan Chi asked, “How do I accumulate virtue, re-
form wickedness, and recognize confusion?” Confucius
said, “Excellent question! Put the effort before the
reward: is that not accumulating virtue? Attack your
own evil rather than the evil of others: is that not
reforming wickedness? In a moment of anger, to for-
get your own safety and that of your family: is that
not confusion?”

¹²·²³Zigong asked how to treat friends. Confucius
said, “Loyally advise them, and skillfully show them
the Way. If that doesnʼt work, then stop. Donʼt dis-
grace yourself.”

—

¹³·¹Zilu asked about government. Confucius said, “Set
an example for them, and encourage them. Be tire-
less.”

¹³·²Zhonggong asked about government. Confucius said,
“Set an example for your officers. Grant pardon for
minor offenses. Promote men of virtue and talent.”

¹³·³A superior man remains silent about things he
doesnʼt understand. He permits no carelessness in his
speech.

¹³·⁵Consider a man who can recite the three hundred
Poems. If he fails when you entrust him with govern-
ance, and cannot act on his own initiative, what use
is all his learning?

¹³·⁶If a man is upright in his personal conduct,
others will follow without him giving orders. If a
man is not upright in his personal conduct, even if
he gives orders, others wonʼt obey.

¹³·¹²Even with a true king, it would still take a gen-
eration for benevolence to prevail.

¹³·¹³If a man can correct himself, what difficulty
will he have in governing? If he canʼt correct him-
self, how can he correct others?

¹³·¹⁵A single saying cannot ruin a country, but there
is a saying that, “The only pleasure of ruling is
that no one contradicts you.” If a ruler is good and
no one contradicts him, thatʼs fine. But if a ruler
is not good and no one contradicts him, then isnʼt
this almost a saying that could ruin a country?

¹³·¹⁶The Governor of She asked about government. Con-
fucius said, “People nearby are pleased, and people
far away come.”

¹³·¹⁷Zixia asked about government. Confucius said,
“Donʼt try to rush things. Donʼt look for small
advantages. If you try to rush things, you wonʼt
reach your goal. If you look for small advantages,
you wonʼt accomplish great things.”

¹³·¹⁹Be courteous at home. Be respectful in handling
public affairs. Be loyal in dealing with others. E-
ven among barbarians, you canʼt discard these.

¹³·²¹If I canʼt find moderate men to associate with,
I must find the reckless and the cautious. The reck-
less advance towards the goal. The cautious have
lines they wonʼt cross.

¹³·²³A superior man seeks harmony without conformi-
ty. An inferior man seeks conformity without harmo-
ny.

¹³·²⁴Itʼs not enough for all the people to love you.
Itʼs not enough for all the people to hate you. Itʼs
better if the good people love you and the bad peo-
ple hate you.

¹³·²⁵If you try to please a superior man without fol-
lowing the Way, he will not be pleased; but when
employing others, he only assigns tasks according to
their capacity. If you try to please an inferior man
without following the Way, he will be pleased; but
when employing others, he expects them to be good at
everything.

¹³·²⁶A superior man has a dignified ease without be-
ing arrogant. An inferior man is arrogant without a
dignified ease.

¹³·²⁷Firm, resolute, simple, slow to speak: these are
close to benevolence.

—

¹⁴·¹To serve a state in which the Way prevails, then
to continue serving it after it has lost the Way.
That is shameful.

¹⁴·²A gentleman who is attached to material comforts
is not worthy of being called a gentleman.

¹⁴·⁴A virtuous man will certainly have something to
say, but a man with something to say is not necessar-
ily virtuous. A benevolent man will certainly be
brave, but a brave man is not necessarily benevo-
lent.

¹⁴·⁷Can you love someone without making them work
hard? Can you be loyal to someone without instructing
them?

¹⁴·¹⁰To be poor without resentment is difficult; to
be rich without arrogance is easy.

¹⁴·¹²A man who is wise, free from desires, brave, ac-
complished, and also refined through ritual and mu-
sic, may be called a complete man. But, does a com-
plete man need all this nowadays? If he sees profit
and thinks of what is right; if he sees danger and is
ready to give his life; if he endures long hardship
and doesnʼt forget the words he lives by: he may be
called a complete man.

¹⁴·²⁰When your words are not humble, itʼs difficult
to live up to them.

¹⁴·²²Zilu asked how to serve a ruler. Confucius said,
“Donʼt use deceit when you oppose him.”

¹⁴·²⁷A superior man is ashamed if his words surpass
his deeds.

¹⁴·²⁸The Way of a superior man has three things that
I canʼt find in myself: the benevolent are not anx-
ious; the wise are not confused; the brave are not a-
fraid.

¹⁴·²⁹Zigong was judging other people. Confucius said,
“Zigong must be of such superior character himself
that he has leisure for this. I donʼt.”

¹⁴·³⁰Donʼt worry that men donʼt recognize you; worry
about your own lack of ability.

¹⁴·³¹To be the first to be aware of deception or bad
faith, without anticipating or suspecting it: is that
not being worthy?

¹⁴·³⁴Someone asked, “What do you think of the say-
ing, ‘Repay resentment with kindness’?” Confucius
said, “Then how will you repay kindness? Repay re-
sentment with uprightness. Repay kindness with kind-
ness.”

¹⁴·³⁵No one understands me! I donʼt complain against
Heaven, nor do I blame men. I study here below, and I
penetrate up above. Who understands me? Heaven does!

¹⁴·³⁶Gongbo Liao had slandered Zilu. Zifu Jingbo
said, “I have enough power to have Gongbo Liaoʼs
corpse displayed in the marketplace.” Confucius said,
“If circumstances allow, the Way will prevail; if
not, the Way will be abandoned. What effect does
Gongbo Liao have on these circumstances?”

¹⁴·³⁷The highest virtue is to avoid the world; next,
to avoid certain places; next, to avoid certain
attitudes; next, to avoid certain words.

¹⁴·⁴¹When those above love propriety, the common peo-
ple are easy to lead.

¹⁴·⁴⁴Confucius employed a boy to carry messages. Some-
one asked, “Is he making any progress?” Confucius
said, “Heʼs not seeking progress. He wants quick
results.”

—

¹⁵·²A superior man is steadfast in the face of adver-
sity, while an inferior man is engulfed by it.

¹⁵·⁵Canʼt Shun be said to have achieved order with-
out forcing? What did he do? He just sat reverently
on the throne, and faced due south.

¹⁵·⁶If your words are loyal and trustworthy, and your
conduct is sincere and respectful, then your conduct
will be proper even among barbarians. If your words
are not loyal and trustworthy, and your conduct is
not sincere and respectful, how can your conduct be
proper, even in your own neighborhood?

¹⁵·⁸If you fail to speak to a man who is capable of
understanding, you waste the man. If you speak to a
man who is incapable of understanding, you waste your
words. The wise waste neither men nor words.

¹⁵·⁹A benevolent man will not injure his benevolence
in order to save his life, but he might sacrifice his
life in order to achieve benevolence.

¹⁵·¹⁰In whatever country youʼre living, serve its
most virtuous officers, and befriend its most benevo-
lent gentelmen. This is how to practice benevolence.

¹⁵·¹²If a man doesnʼt concern himself with whatʼs far
away, he will have sorrows near at hand.

¹⁵·¹⁵If you demand much from yourself and little from
others, you will keep resentment at a distance.

¹⁵·¹⁸A superior man takes what is right as his ba-
sis. He practices it with propriety, demonstrates it
with modesty, and completes it with good faith.

¹⁵·²⁰A superior man hates the thought of leaving the
world without making a name for himself. ²¹A superi-
or man makes demands on himself; an inferior man
makes demands on others. ²²A superior man is confi-
dent without being contentious; gathers with others
but doesnʼt form cliques. ²³A superior man doesnʼt
promote a man because of his words, and doesnʼt re-
ject the words because of the man.

¹⁵·²⁷Clever words disrupt virtue. Impatience in small
matters disrupts great plans.

¹⁵·²⁸ When everyone loves a man, you must investi-
gate. When everyone hates a man, you must investi-
gate.

¹⁵·³⁰To have a fault and not correct it is a fault in-
deed.

¹⁵·³¹I once spent a whole day without eating and a
whole night without sleeping in order to think. I got
nothing out of it. It would have been better to stud-
y.

¹⁵·³²A superior man makes his plans around the Way,
not around food. A superior man worries about the
Way, not about poverty.

¹⁵·³⁶In the pursuit of benevolence, donʼt yield even
to your teacher.

¹⁵·³⁷A superior man is principled, but not rigid.

¹⁵·³⁸In serving your ruler, devotion to duty comes be-
fore any thought of compensation. ³⁹In teaching,
there is no such thing as social class.

¹⁵·⁴⁰Those who follow a different Way canʼt make
plans together.

¹⁵·⁴¹In expressing yourself, get the point across
then stop.
